RFC 86: Public roadmap updates (#86)
wagtail/rfcs: text/086-roadmap-updates.md

# RFC 086: Public roadmap updates

- RFC: 086
- Author: Thibaud Colas
- Created: 2023-04-23
- Last Modified: 2023-04-23

## Abstract

This RFC provides a high-level overview of proposed [public roadmap](https://github.com/wagtail/roadmap) updates for future releases. This follows recent updates and process changes introduced in [RFC 84](https://github.com/wagtail/rfcs/pull/84).

The majority of the changes here are proposed additions, but there are also roadmap items being rescheduled from v5.1\* to future releases.

## Proposed items scheduled for Wagtail 5.1\* (August 2023)

> 5.1\*: Provisional version number

### [Enhanced dashboard #45](https://github.com/wagtail/roadmap/issues/45)

> Proposed tags: ux, customisations

Redesign of Wagtail’s dashboard to make it more useful. This will include:

- Workflow functionality improvements
- Visual design changes to summary items and welcome message

See also:

- [The Wagtail dashboard could be enhanced #8325](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/discussions/8325)
- [Workflow approval UI on dashboard is confusing #7132](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/7132)

> ### [Permissions consolidation #39](https://github.com/wagtail/roadmap/issues/39)

Author: From further discussions (cc @gasman) – for pages, this will be done in a backwards-compatible way. Elsewhere, pre-existing implementations are internal APIs only so we make no guarantee any unsupported customisations will keep working as-is.

> Proposed tags: ux, accessibility

A comprehensive accessibility audit of Wagtail’s admin interface, according to our target [accessibility standards](https://wagtail.org/accessibility/) (WCAG 2.1 AA, ATAG 2.0), potentially also including WCAG 2.1 AAA and WCAG 2.2 A, AA, AAA criteria.

#### Intended outcome

- Updated accessibility statement with known issues
- Prioritised backlog of accessibility issues to resolve

#### More information

- [Living accessibility audit](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1l7tnpEyJiC5BWE_JX0XCkknyrjxYA5T2aee5JgPnmi4/edit)
- [WCAG 2.1 AA for CMS admin backlog](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/projects/5).

### Content APIs in rich text / StreamField

> Proposed tags: content lifecycle, customisations

See [Feature request: add support for more customisations of Draftail #5580](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/5580). Potentially also including more editor-agnostic APIs, and StreamField APIs (discovery needed).

See also [Draftail for general text entry #26](https://github.com/wagtail/roadmap/issues/26)

### UI auditing & consolidation

> Proposed tags: ux, tech debt

> Reduce UI debt via more UI auditing / patterns consolidation to be done. Potentially including completion of [chooser UI updates #9246](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/pull/9246).

Reviewer: I'm more than happy to support rebase/redoing this PR as a Stimulus implementation if that helps.

Author: 👍 I forget why exactly this PR stalled initially. I believe it might have been due to how much code was shared between choosers and listings, which I hope will be simpler once we revisit the listings as part of the "treeless" project.

### Page editor UX improvements

> Proposed tags: ux

Further refinements on recent UX improvements in recent releases.

#### Intended Outcome

- [Page editor minimap UI refinements #10055](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/issues/10055)
- Other more minor UX changes based on design review ([Wagtail 3.x-4.x editor experience feedback #9553](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/discussions/9553))

#### More information

See [Wagtail 3.x-4.x editor experience feedback #9553](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/discussions/9553)

### Extend Stimulus adoption

> Proposed tags: tech debt, security

Further adoption of Stimulus to support stricter CSP policies (stop using inline JS to initialise features).

> Exact improvements TBC in line with [Stimulus adoption schedule](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1LdrXlj8OeCWy3B_moYZ-ynhfZZtFVHPahG9GFoT-XBs/edit).

Reviewer: Can we also add the Stimulus project, I've kept using this to track all recent progress and all issues that would or could be resolved by Stimulus adoption. The spreadsheet is still relevant as it contains a full list of all UO widgets that could use Stimulus, but the project is more about PRs and issues already raised.

https://github.com/orgs/wagtail/projects/14/views/1

Author: Yup good shout!

> Moving from v5.1 to v5.2 due to prioritisation changes.

Follow-up to earlier consolidation of search functionality.

## Intended Outcome

- Implement missing features in db search backends: boosting / limiting fields
- Pick a successor to elasticsearch as our best-of-breed search backend
- Move search into separate package
- New search back-end
- Better docs/APIs for third-parties

## Proposed items for indeterminate "Future" releases

> In addition to all items currently present in "Future" column

### [RTL languages support #43](https://github.com/wagtail/roadmap/issues/43)

> Proposed tags: ux, needs sponsorship
> Moving from v5.1 to "Future" as we are hoping to find a sponsor for this work.

Full support for right-to-left (RTL) languages in the Wagtail admin.

#### Intended Outcome

- The admin UI works with RTL layout out of the box
- Contributor documentation shows how RTL languages should be handled
- Testing of correct RTL rendering

#### More information

- [Supporting RTL languages](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/discussions/7793)

### Scheduled page reviews

> Proposed tags: content lifecycle, needs sponsorship

> - Audit and compliance reporting: who did what and when?

Reviewer 2: This one is a bit unclear to me. I'm not sure what audit and compliance reporting has to do with "scheduled" page reviews.

Author: I’ll try to find clearer information where this comes from, I’m not sure either. As I recall, the idea was that those scheduled page reviews (as in [wagtail-periodic-review](https://github.com/zerolab/wagtail-periodic-review)) would help with conformance to specific standards requiring there is an established process to keep content up-to-date.

I believe this came up as part of [ISO 27001 Information security management systems](https://www.iso.org/standard/27001) compliance, and also when we help people follow Google’s [EEAT guidelines](https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2022/12/google-raters-guidelines-e-e-a-t), but that might just be me mixing things up.

Author: I’ll remove this before merging the RFC. I believe there’s interesting things to do in this space but at this stage this is only proposed for an indeterminate "future" release, so it can wait until we’re clearer.

> ### Media versioning
> 
> > Proposed tags: content lifecycle, needs sponsorship
> 
> Bring snippets addons to image and document models for versioning and history of images and documents.

Reviewer 2: This one looks pretty good, just suggesting a minor clarification.

```suggestion
### Media versioning

> Proposed tags: content lifecycle, needs sponsorship

Apply some of the same concepts from [Supercharged Snippets](https://github.com/wagtail/rfcs/pull/85) to image and document models, versioning and history in particular.
```

Author: Thank you!
